Network Ecology -- the study of ecological systems using network
models and analysis to characterize their structure, function, and
evolution -- is a large and rapidly growing area of ecology.
\citet{borrett14_rise} found that more than 5\% of the ecology and
evolutionary biology papers published in 2012 could be classified as
Network Ecology.  Likewise, \citet{ings2009} showed that a sizable
fraction of 2008 publications in 11 select journals were related to
food webs ($\approx$2.4\%), mututalistic networks ($\approx$0.9\%),
and host-parasitoid networks($\approx$0.055\%).  Networks are widely
useful in ecology in part because they are inherently a relational
model.  In addition, this rise of network ecology contributes to,
mirrors, and builds on the more general development of network
sciences \citep{wasserman94, barabasi02, barabasi12,
  borgatti2003network, freeman2004development, newman03review}

% what is ENA
Ecological Network Analysis (ENA) is a branch of network ecology that
is rooted in ecosystem ecology \citep{borrett12_netecol}.  It works
like a ``macroscope'' to investigate (1) whole system organization,
(2) the direct and indirect effects among system components, and (3)
the processes that create and sustain ecological systems.  More
specifically, ENA is a family of algorithms that are an ecological
application and extension of Leontief's (\citeyear{leontief66})
economic Input-Output Analysis.  These algorithms are applied to
network models of energy and matter exchange among ecosystem
components \citep{patten76, ulanowicz86, fath99_review}.

% examples of recent use
The development of ENA has contributed to a new theoretical
understanding of ecosystems \citep{ulanowicz86, higashi91, belgrano05,
  jorgensen07_newecology} and the techniques have been applied in a
several ways.  For example, \citet{patten82} used a storage analysis
to identify two nearly separate hydrologic subsystems in the
Okefenokee Swamp, USA.  \citet{bondavalli99} showed that in the
Florida Everglades the American alligator is an indirect mutualist
with several of its prey items, including frogs.  \citet{hines12} used
ENA to study the Cape Fear River estuary nitrogen cycle, and applied
the tools to quantify the coupling between biogeochemical processes
(e.g., nitrification + anammox).  Subsequent work showed the potential
impact of sea water intrusion on the N cycle \citep{hines14}.
Furthermore, several scientists have used ENA to investigate urban
sustainability \citep{bodini02, zhang10_ecomod, chen12,
  bodini2012cities}.  Collectively, this work consistently shows the
power of the interaction network to transform relationships among
system components in non-obvious ways that require whole-systems
analysis to elucidate \citep{ulanowicz90, patten91,
  fath07_netconstruction}.

% Two School's: Ulanowicz & Patten
While many influences combined to create what we now call ENA
\citep[e.g.,][]{patten59, margalef63, hannon73, pimm82,
  golley1993history}, since the 1970s two primary schools of thought
have developed \citep{scharler09comparing, fath2012dependence}.  The
first is based on the work of Dr.\ Robert E. Ulanowicz, which was
centered at the University of Maryland \citep{ulanowicz86,
  ulanowicz97, ulanowicz09_window}.  The Ulanowicz school of ENA is
primarily focused on trophic ecology, and its starting point is a
phenomenological map of the energy--matter exchanges among ecosystem
components.  A key contribution of this work is the use of information
theory and the development of the ascendecy concept that
\citet{ulanowicz86, ulanowicz97} used to characterize ecosystem growth
and development.  The second school is based on the work of Dr.\
Bernard C. Patten at the University of Georgia \citep{patten76,
  matis81, patten82, fath99_review}.  Its initial perspective was
steeped in dynamic equations, simulations, and systems analysis, with
a distinct network flavor.  A key contribution of this work is the
environ concept that formalizes the concept of environment for study
inside the network models \citep{patten78}.  The Patten School of work
has often been referred to as ``Network Environ Analysis''.  The
Ulanowicz and Patten School's of ENA represent two distinct but
interwoven developments.  Together, they join information theory,
environmental concepts, and network science to study ecosystems.

% Existing Software/Tools : NETWRK, WAND, ECOPATH, NEA.m EcoNet
Several software tools have been created that enable scientists to
more easily apply ENA. The first widely distributed tool was NETWRK
\citep{ulanowicz91}.  This program is a collection of analyses from
the Ulanowicz School that is programmed in Fortran and distributed as
a DOS executable file. Version 4.2 is available from
(\href{http://www.cbl.umces.edu/~ulan/ntwk/network.html}{http://www.cbl.umces.edu/~ulan/ntwk/network.html}).
WAND is a Microsoft Excel based re-implementation of many but not all
of the algorithms in NETWRK \citep{allesina04_wand}. An explicit goal
of WAND was to be more accessible for ecologists, who have tended to
be more familiar with Excel than DOS.  \citet{fath06} introduced a
Matlab function, NEA.m, that assembled the primary algorithms from the
Patten School.  One advantage of NEA.m is that the algorithms are
transparent to the user and available for modification.  While the
NEA.m function is freely available
(\href{http://www.mathworks.com/matlabcentral/fileexchange/5261-nea-m}{http://www.mathworks.com/matlabcentral/fileexchange/5261-nea-m})
it requires Matlab, which is a powerful but expensive program.  With
modification, the function can be run in Octave, an open source clone
of Matlab, but it executes more slowly.  EcoNet is a web-based tool
that lets users apply ENA primarily from the Patten School, but with
some computational enhancements \citep{kazanci07, schramski11}.
Ecopath with Ecosim \citep{christensen92, christensen04} is used
primarily for model construction and simulation, but it also includes
a network analysis plug-in that implements several ENA algorithms
mostly from the Ulanowicz School.  Other tools have been created, but
do not appear to have a large user base \citep{latham2006,kones09}. A
challenge for ENA users has been that no existing software covers both
schools of analysis, and the tools very widely in their availability,
usability, and extensibility.

% Objectives
To address the limitations of the existing tools, we created \neaR,
which is a professional grade set of \R\ tools for Ecological Network
Analysis.  Here, we introduce version 2.0 of this package.  For this
software package, we had three specific design objectives.  The first
objective was to collect the algorithms from both the Ulanowicz and
Patten schools of ENA to enable users to implement both approaches.
The second objective was to increase both the availability and
extensibility of the software. Users can freely download the code from
the CRAN website, access the original code, make modifications, and
add new functionality as techniques develop.  The third design
objective was to let users connect to other existing network science
tools.
