Dear JSS Editor,

Thank you very much for reviewing our first submission to JSS of our
paper "Ecosystem Network Analysis with R: A guide for using enaR". We
greatly appreciate your work in making this an excellent journal, and
challenging us to improve our work. 

Our hope was to publish the R software vignette for enaR in JSS.  Our
first paper on the software published in "Methods in Ecology and
Evolution" does introduce the software at a very high level, but it
would be nearly impossible for a new user to use the paper to use the
software.  The intent of the paper we submitted was to provide the
detailed guide a new user woud need.  However, we understand your
concern about overlapping content.

We would like to revise our manuscript for re-submission to JSS, but
we would appreciate some clarification to get a better idea of how to
make our re-submission more successful.

Would a If we were to re-focuse the manuscript on three new features that were not
implemented at the time of publication of the MEE paper, including
three new algorithms (cyberModels, trophic aggregation and cycle
bases) and new tools that incorporate uncertainty and sensitivity
analyses?

Could new insights be showing that these algorithms provide new and
useful perspectives?

We would like to have the entire vignette published. Would we need to
only have “new” content?

We aren’t looking for a verification of acceptance given changes, but
some feedback on whether or not these improvements are on the
appropriate track.

Thank you again for your courteous and thoughtful review of our
manuscript.

