To the editor of the Journal of Statistical Software,

We are pleased to submit a manuscript for a JoSS Article that provides
a detailed guide to using the enaR software package to perorm
Ecosystem Network Analysis (ENA). ENA is a tool to investigate the
structure, function, and behavior of complex ecological systems,
drawing from economic input-output theory and the mathematics
developed in the field network science. ENA has a long history in
ecology and lies at the roots of multiple core topics including the
determinants of biodiversity and the factors determining the cycling
of essential nutrients. In addition to facillitating the applicaiton
of ENA, the enaR package serves to collect a number of analytical
algorithms that have previously developed on separate research
trajectories.  Collecting them together in one software and common
framework provides an opportunity for the synthesis of the
underlying theory.

We first introduced the enaR package to the ecologcial community
through a short paper published in Methods in Ecology and Evolution
(Borrett and Lau, 2014).  The paper we are submitting to JoSS expands
on this initial introduction, is updated to match the current version
(we have added several algorithms), and more fully explains how to use
the software in a way that was not possible in the initial paper.

In closing, we thank you for considering our manuscript for
publication in JoSS. We look forward to receiving your response.

Sincerely,


Matt Lau, Stuart Borrett and Pawandeep Singh


Reference

Borrett, S.R. and Lau, M. K. 2014. enaR: An R package for Ecosystem
Network Analysis.  Methods in Ecology and Evolution 5(11),
1206--1213. 
